Is it, do you think, just a coincidence, that the last three novels, one has been historical, one has played on a tragedy, and now we have a comedy?
I mean, are we doing a real considerable bow towards Mr. Shakespeare, or at his fifth day of a week or a half ago?
No, but the...
The Greenlanders, I consider it an epic.
So it's not Shakespearean, but I did want to try all the major forms.
So I tried an epic, then a tragedy, then a comedy.
So I am on track at least a tad here.
Not the next one, but at some point I'll try and do a Romeo.
Maybe you should try and do a novel in sonnets.
Oh.
Remember, Vikram Seth, his first novel was entirely in sonnets.
It was?
Tell me, I mean, this obviously must be quite a fascination with Shakespeare.
It really is resonating to a good deal of your work.
Well, it was only A Thousand Acres that was consciously based on Shakespeare.
Moo, I just intended to be a comedy, but I guess I...
learned most of what I know about what a comedy is when I took Shakespeare.
So that has been just a sort of hidden influence rather than a conscious influence.
I agree with Alison Lurie.
I mean, the good giveaway is to end with the weddings, you know, which is so characteristic of all the Shakespeare product qualities.
With that conscious device,
that you worked into?
Yes, I knew I wanted to end with weddings.
And I just wanted it to be recognizably comic.
When you're creating a comic novel like this, and certainly to follow one that was just 180 degrees in the other direction, creatively, I mean,
Well, I don't think it shocks people who have read a lot of my work other than A Thousand Acres, because I always did.
I don't think this Moo is any more different from A Thousand Acres than, let's say, the Greenlanders was from Duplicate Keys, you know.
It's just, I like to try different things.
And I had intended to write both a tragedy and a comedy on the same theme, you know, the theme of American agriculture.
And so I conceived of them at about the same time.
And as I was researching A Thousand Acres,
I was thinking also about moods.
Yeah, so this was in your mind when you... Mm-hmm.
And was this novel germinating?
Oh, more or less.
I mean, I was noting things in my research that might be interesting, and I was... People were talking to me, and I was thinking about what they had to say.
So I wasn't actually writing notes or planning or anything, but...
I knew that it was next.
I read someplace where you mentioned research.
I mean, you really did almost go out and become an anthropologist to some degree, didn't you?
I mean, you really went out and entered the lives of a farmer.
Well, I did, in a way, though less than appears on the surface.
I mean, I talked to a lot of people, and I read the Des Moines Register a lot, and I read a lot of books.
And then when I had written most of 1,000 acres, I found people who were knowledgeable about farming and had them read the manuscripts and tell me what was right and what was wrong.
So yes, I did research, but I don't think of that.
I think of that as just interesting reading, you know, reading something that I'm interested in more than,
you know, toiling away at the library or anything like that.
Do you see these two as a pair, then?
Oh, yeah.
Very much.
I hope they're in a slipcase someday.
Well, I'd love to ask you to describe those two to me, and then the bottom one is from my editor at Hope.
Oh, great.
Who's a great fan of yours.
Alan Peacock, actually.
Oh, thanks.
I told him when I said to be interviewing you, Jason Lee, give me a song.
Oh, sure.
He's Bob Butler, his editor.
You mentioned Des Moines.
Do you remember Steven Blumberg, the book Thief?
Yes, sir.
I was at that trial.
He's in my book.
I wrote a book about bibliomania.
Oh, is that right?
And I've got a major chapter.
He must be the biggest bibliomanian ever, right?
Well, bibliocleptomaniac is what he is.
He's the biggest one in the 20th century by far.
He's my example of excess.
person who goes over the cliff when he comes back.
Yeah, that seems an interesting case.
Well, the great thing about him is that he stole the stuff to keep it.
Rather than to sell it, yeah.
I mean, there was no profit or anything.
He kept putting a collection together in a tumble.
And I went, and his house was in all these shelves.
Really weird, weird case.
Really amazing.
Yeah.
His defense was insanity, if you can believe it.
And he should have won.
Anyway, you don't want to hear about this, but you mentioned Des Moines.
How do you respond to Lurie's suggestion that you're the Balzac of the American Midwest?
Well, you know, that's an interesting thing because just a few months ago I said,
to somebody, have you ever read any Balzac?
And they said, oh, a long time ago.
And I said, well, I never have, I should.
And so I was kind of, I'd read some kind of, I don't know, article or review of Balzac in which they were talking about what a wonderful writer he was.
And I thought, gee, I should read some of that.
But I'm not very knowledgeable about French literature stuff.
I had never read any, and I haven't yet.
You should read this recent biography.
It's absolutely spectacular.
My wife got it.
Maybe it was a review of that.
Yeah, it was.
It was one of the New York Times' ten notable books.
It's a really wonderful book.
Well, I should read some, but I'm not a very fast reader, so between student work and review books and stuff like that.
Is this, in your mind,
A satire?
Well, it's a comic, satiric novel.
I think of Fielding, you know, comico-satirico-ethical novel.
I want it to be both satirical and comic.
And as a satirical novel, then, what is the target, in your view, of your satire?
Oh, a certain attitude of this, I think, typically American, that, you know, if we know a little technique about something and then apply it, it'll be great.
You know, the difference between maybe technique and knowledge, you know, everybody, every technique is successful, essentially, you know, but people who
knew the technique of the frontal lobotomy were totally successful in removing the frontal lobe, but they didn't know anything about what that was gonna do.
So that's fascinating because the land grant university in general has been very technically oriented and has applied a lot of techniques without thinking through in a very clear way what
those techniques were going to mean over the long run so it's i'm not targeting at any particular university it's just uh i'm interested in a whole way of thinking about now did you read by its possession i'm wondering and that almost is a satire academic question
I don't remember.
This passion was just to get all these manuscripts and the writing involved, but you really, it is a very, your book is really a funny look at the academic community.
Well, that's what I wanted to do.
I mean, I think it's a temptation for every comic writer to try and be as funny as possible, and so you can't resist
being funny if you possibly can i mean did you have this just wonderful uh pig in mind right from the beginning really yeah i didn't know exactly why or what i was going to do with him but um one of the first things anybody uh one of the first things i ever heard that sort of put me on this track
Or somebody said, or I read somewhere, that no hog had ever lived out its natural lifespan.
And I thought that was fascinating.
And of course it would be true because hogs don't have any real usefulness except being consumed.
They aren't like horses or llamas or... Right, or even dogs or cats.
Except truffle hogs, I guess, they don't function.
And yet they're very intelligent and they have a kind of, I don't know, charm.
So that fascinated me, the idea.
I'm sure there are hogs that have lived out their natural lives there, but I had never
I heard this, but this hasn't been... But that would be almost an Iowa kind of thing, wouldn't it?
I mean, I mean, we'd have to even consider that.
And then I asked somebody, I asked some of my people I knew who had had hogs or who knew hogs, what their lifespan was on the farm, even if they were used for breeding, and they were all, it was all, you know,
four to five years well that doesn't seem very long chicken can live that long and so i said well why what about will they keep growing and they said well yeah but there's a limit on the size of the boar because the sow can't support the boar past a certain weight during breeding so that's a reason to
water the breeding boards, because if they get too big, they can't really breed anymore without hurting the staff.
So I thought, well, that's interesting, too, you know?
So all that stuff about hogs really fascinated me.
And of course, it's funny.
Yeah, it's funny.
I mean, pig is funny.
I mean, if you don't even know anything about the pig.
Right.
And did you realize that you'd actually be characterizing his pig to a degree?
Yeah, I did.
I knew he would have a point of view.
And those chapters were fun to write.
I'm just laughing.
It's almost brazen, isn't it?
Well, some of the first people I had read the book found it unacceptable.
that the hog had a point of view.
And... But, you know, I liked him and I thought, well, it certainly makes it different, you know, from other academic novels.
So I just went ahead and, you know, did what I wanted to do.
Would you say that this is a uniquely American novel?
Well, sure, because that this whole idea of... This couldn't be written by any other kind of...
I don't think so, because this whole idea of the land-grant university arose out of the settling of the Midwest and the West, especially the Midwest.
So the first departments that they had were agronomy and engineering and HOMAC.
Their idea was to teach the settlers how to more productively
the land that they were settling.
And the founding of the land-grant university is coterminous with that period of rapid settlement just after the Civil War.
So I don't know.
It's not—there's not another—no other country has a university tradition that's in any way like this.
That's true.
and setting up my syndicates to mindfully go after newspapers in cities where the State University's been.
Because in many cases, there's nothing else for miles around, you know.
What's Eugene going for, the State University?
What's Lincoln going for, I guess?
It's amazing.
Astorias, Connecticut.
It's just where they put this university, and they were all when they had... A lot of them are.
In Oregon, Corvallis is the Wayne Grant University, but a lot of them that you don't expect to be Wayne Grant Universities like Berkeley are Wayne Grant Universities.
Or Amherst in Massachusetts.
This is hardly an agricultural state deal.
There are more than you think there are, at least there are more than I thought there were, because I got
of them out of the University of Wisconsin.
I was pretty surprised at which ones were land-grant universities in some cases.
Because you do see these as a pair, so then tell me, if you might, how it started.
I think you're teaching certainly out in Iowa, but I don't think you were in Midwestern.
Yes, I was raised in St.
Louis.
Oh, okay.
But you were an Army brat, aren't you?
No, my father was in the Army, but after
after he and my mother got married.
He was not so young, but they were divorced when I was very young, and I moved back.
My mother moved back with my grandparents, and my grandparents lived in St.
Louis, so I'm pretty Midwestern.
Missouri isn't Midwestern in the same way that Iowa is or Illinois is.
I don't think it's Southern.
It's definitely a border state.
So it's southern, and St.
Louis is a very old city, so in a way it's even kind of eastern.
Pardon me.
You've done quite an impressive—you have quite an impressive body of work, and I think one of the very remarkable aspects of it is a variety of things that you've done.
Oh, thank you.
Well, I get bored with doing the same thing over and over again.
I have a real horror of doing the same thing over and over again.
In fact, if I'm working on an idea and I realize there's something in it that I've done before, I sort of
and panic.
And I don't know why that is, but I just, in that way, and I like novelty.
I also think that every person reads different forms, so all the forms must appeal to something different in each person.
You're talking about the readers now.
Right.
So I don't see why a writer, you know, every form must express a different side of each writer, too.
So I guess that's what I feel that each of the forms that I'm working in expresses a different side.
How about themes, though?
I mean, a form's certainly different, but how about themes?
Do you find a consistency?
Well, I've always been interested in country life as opposed to city life, and even in Duplicate Keys, which takes place in New York City.
The people live near Riverside Park, and they spend a lot of time about as close to nature as you can get in Manhattan.
I just don't particularly care for urban life, and I don't know much about it.
I don't want to live in urban life, so... You say you've got somebody calling at 2.30.
That's okay.
We can go all the way until they call.
We aren't necessarily going to be on time.
And you are interested, of course, in relationships and families?
I think I mentioned earlier that this is an American novel.
Do you see yourself as writing an affinity for an American tradition?
Why does it really have an affinity for place?
Well, I do feel that I have an affinity for place in the sense that
I can't really start, or I don't usually start writing until I know where it's set and what that place is like.
And that gives me a lot of energy.
But actually, you know, my favorite writers that I read are not traditional American writers.
Well-educated in British and Russian and Scandinavian writers, so... Could you give me a couple of examples of who you read for pleasure?
Oh, Dickens and George Eliot.
So the 19th century ones?
Mm-hmm.
And Gokul.
And, for example, I'm very poorly read in Hemingway and Faulkner.
just american literature in general yeah so contemporary writers well i i yeah i know i read a lot of contemporary writers like sue miller and russell banks and jamaica kincai um and i especially like caribbean women writers and so i'm i'm pretty well read or i'm a slow reader as i said but i'm pretty well read in modern american writers but
But not in the older one.
I just got a curiosity when you say slow reader.
How many pages in an hour?
I'm just curious if you have the right piece.
Well, it depends on the book, but maybe about 30.
30 slow?
When you read books, as I do, you know, for a living, I mean, you have to even time yourself.
I mean, I've got to be doing 100 pages in an hour, you know, and I'll never do that.
Oh, no.
I'll never do that.
And I have to read a lot of student work.
I teach a course in graduate fiction writing, and the students have to write and discuss a draft a week, so that's generally about, I have 12 students, that's about 400 pages a week right there.
So in manuscript pages, I can go faster than,
I'm not a very fast reader, and I have, you know, a family, and a little boy is two, so.
So he doesn't go to bed until 10 o'clock, so there's no reading until he goes to bed.
You really seem to get passionate about your subjects.
You really do.
You immerse yourself, it seems, in your writing.
Did you have fun writing, Lou?
Oh, yeah.
How about fun writing thousands of days?
That wouldn't have been fun.
No, that wouldn't have been fun.
And if you don't mind my even asking questions about that, because you do see them together.
I did get a thousand words in a piece, so I can cover it like that.
You did kind of turn the tables on NOI for one from making
I know you've commented about it, but I wonder if you could comment to me about it, how that came to pass and how you felt justified really tinkering with Shakespeare.
Actually, you've even said that you really don't think you tinkered with Shakespeare.
Well, I think that I took a situation that had been presented
from one angle and kind of turned it 90 degrees and presented it from another angle.
I always felt that the older sisters had some kind of point of view in the play.
They were purely evil.
Well, Lear characterized them as purely evil.
I mean, in your view.
But, you know, I don't characterize anybody as purely evil.
In our day and age, we looked for other kinds of motivation besides just pure evil.
And so I was looking for some other motivation, and I decided maybe anger was the motivation.
But if you looked at them as deeply angry, then you had to look at their history
You had to look at what had made them so angry.
It was interesting in the play that Lear always acts from the beginning of the play as if there's no past, as if everything starts today.
And the biggest, the greatest sign of that is that he doesn't consult
his knowledge of whether his daughters love him or not.
He just gives them this test today.
And this goes, this stands for every, this, or not, doesn't stand for it, but it kind of relegates all their history together to the dustbin, you know.
And that fascinated me that he would,
he would not acknowledge there having been a history.
And I hadn't thought about that too much.
I thought about it a little bit, but then when I saw Kurosawa's movie, Ron, one of the sons, the daughters were changed into sons, and one of the sons says to the father early in the movie, what we are, you made of.
And I thought, well, obviously that's true.
And that would apply to daughters as well as sons if you went back and looked at King Lear again.
So all those thoughts sort of gestated together.
What are you working on now?
This is three years, I guess, four years between the books?
Well, it's been three and a half years since the thousand acres.
Yeah, I had another novella that I was interested in publishing, but the publisher said no, he wanted a novel, so he went home and wrote a novel.
But I don't think it'll be that long now, until the next one, maybe two years.
You said it will be another novel, I'm sorry.
Yeah, it'll probably be a novel, a little shorter.
again another exploration of form for you?
No.
Oh, yeah, another exploration of form.
I thought you said another exploration of farming.
No more about agriculture for the time being.
But you've had fun with it.
Yeah, it's been great.
It's a good subject.
More people should do it.
I mean, the thing I noticed about I reviewed a novel called
In the Place of Fallen Leaves by Tim Pears, a British writer, for the Washington Post earlier this year.
And it was a wonderful novel.
I gave it a good to hear.
And the thing I noticed about it was that it just brought so many great ideas into contemporary English literature, which is entirely urban, you know.
You have to get out into the country sometimes.
There are wonderful primal dramas taking place in the country.
The country is a source of great emotion and great spirituality and also great thoughts.
And if you don't, your literature or your writers
you know, never get out, never get past suburbia, then they don't get, then none of these forces ever get into their work, and that's what I like.
I have to say, I'm delighted to be interviewing a mid-question writer.
Okay.
Again, it's just the way it's been lately.
I've even been doing a lot of East Coast writers and a lot of English writers, you know.
Oh, yeah.
So it's really great to have that.
And, of course, I'd be glad to be with you here.
I don't really question you about the book.
That's my job, to read them and to make a comment.
It's kind of foolish to ask you which headline you have.
Sure, that's fine.
But I'm supposed to do that.
I really am not going to take up too much of your time.
It's fine.
I didn't have to do with Nadine Goymo.
She was up there doing some lectures at Harvard last fall.
And she made a very interesting comment.
She said, you know, because her body of work is enormous.
But she felt that everything, the metaphor was a statue, a piece of sculpture.
And so going into the room, and it's one sculpture, but every book is kind of walking around and looking at the same piece from a different angle, that it really is all part of one piece.
And I wonder, do you agree with that?
Or would you suggest that your work would, would you see your work similarly?
No, I wouldn't.
I would look at it as a different... She's walking around one thing and looking at it from different angles, but I feel more like I'm in... I am in a spot, and I'm turning and looking at different things, looking outward rather than looking at something.
But nevertheless, you do certainly see this as a body of work that you're creating.
book after book.
Yeah, it'll shape up to do that.
You're having fun.
Whether it's your survey.
Yeah.
You enjoy this.
This is not mission so much.
You enjoy it.
Do you feel a sense of mission in writing?
It depends on the book.
I mean, I don't feel it in particular in general, but if I'm writing, I think all of my books have a political viewpoint
And they're all engaged with the world and they want the world.
You know, Russell Banks, in one of his books, he wrote, go my book and destroy the world as it is.
You know, I think there are a lot of writers who would say that that applies to them, too.
I'm going to wrap it up.
if that's okay with you, lots of stuff.
And could you do me the others?